# Shrub-Flammability

## Project goals

-   To test whether the canopy traits is more important than leaf traits
    in shrub flammability or not.

-   To test current theory including predictions that heat release and
    flame spread rate are relatively independent axes of flammability in
    shrub fuels.

-   To test whether the flammability of those species which have
    chemical defense against herbivore are more flammable than those
    species which have physical defense or not.

## Methods

We have collected 23 shrub species from multiple counties in Texas
(species description is in species_table_2022.csv). For each sample for
each species, we have collected alike, a paired 70 cm branch from the
same plant. The collected branches were stored in big coolers and
brought them back to Schwilk Lab. One of the branch get burned to
measure the flammability traits and other branch left unburned. We have
also collected a sub-sample of leaf and twig with leaves from the same
plant which was used to measure the leaf traits and field moisture
content.

-   Burned sample : Each burned sample went through 36 hours of bench
    drying inside Schwilk Lab at Texas Tech before burning. The
    temperature and humidity of the drying period was recorded by the
    hobo data logger. We measured the canopy volume during the bench
    drying period and burned them after 36 hours of drying. We also
    measured the canopy moisture content and leaf moisture content of
    the burned sample by separating some twigs with leaves and leaves
    right before burning.

-   Unburned sample : We measured the leaf stem mass ratio by separating
    the leaf (including the rachis and petiole) from the stem from the
    unburned sample.

-   Sub-sample : We measured the leaf mass per area, leaf area per
    leaflet, leaf length per leaflet and field moisture content from the
    sub-samples which was collected from the same plants from where the
    paired branch collected.

## Plant traits and their descriptions

### Canopy Traits

-   Canopy density : The canopy density of the burned sample measured
    during the bench drying period of the burned branch. We assumed that
    the 70 cm branch would have a particular geometric shape among three
    possible shape : cylinder, truncated cone and the combination of two
    truncated cone. For those samples which have a cylinder shape, we
    measured the diameter of the branch at three different position
    (top, bottom, middle). Then we averaged the diameter and calculated
    the volume according to the formula of the volume of a cylinder. For
    those samples which have truncated cone shape, we measured the
    diameter at the top and at the bottom. For those samples which have
    the shape of the combination of two truncated cone, we measured the
    maximum diameter, distance of the maximum diameter from the bottom
    and the diameter at the bottom and at the top portion of the branch.
    Then we calculated the volume of the truncated cone according to the
    formula of a truncated cone. For all the types of shape, we
    calculated the canopy density by dividing the total mass of the
    burning sample in dry basis by the canopy volume.

-   Leaf stem mass ratio : We have collected two 70 cm branch from the
    same plant for each sample. We made sure that the two branch look
    alike and assumed that those two branch have almost similar amount
    of leaf stem mass ratio. One of the branch was used to measure the
    leaf stem mass ratio. After getting the samples back in the lab from
    field, we separated the leaf (rachis and petiole included) from the
    stem and took their fresh weight separately. Both the leaf and stem
    went through 48 hours of drying period at 65 degree celsius and took
    their dry weight and calculated the leaf stem mass ratio in dry
    weight basis.

-   Total weight of the burning sample : We took the fresh weight of
    each burning sample right before burning. Then we converted the
    fresh weight into dry weight by multiplying the ratio of the dry
    weight and fresh weight of the twig with few leaves which was
    separated from the burning sample right before burning to measure
    the canopy moisture content. After that we added the dry weight of
    the twig with few leaves and the leaves (which was separated from
    the burning sample right before burning to calculate the leaf
    moisture content) with the dry weight of the burning sample to get
    the total weight of the burning sample in dry basis.

-   Canopy moisture content : A twig with few leaves were separated from
    the burning samples right before burning. After taking the fresh
    weight, it went through 48 hours of drying inside oven at 65 degree
    celsius and then calculated the moisture content as percentage in
    dry basis.

### Leaf Traits

-   Leaf mass per area : We have used five leaves which was separated
    from the sub-samples to measure the LMA. For most of the species we
    have used five leaves and some of them have less than five or more
    than five. We took the fresh weight of the leaves and then they went
    through 48 hours of drying inside oven at 65 degree celsius. The
    leaf area of the leaves were measured in Licor 3100 leaf area meter.
    We used the dry weight of the leaves in calculating the leaf mass
    per area. Three species from *Juniperus* group, we calculated their
    leaf area manually. We took 10 branchlets for each samples. We
    assumed that the shape of the branchlet is a cylinder. We measured
    the diameter and length of each branchlets by slide calipers and
    meter scale respectively and calculated their area based on the
    formula of the surface area of a cylinder. After taking the fresh
    weight of the 10 branchlets , they put inside the oven for 48 hours
    at 65 degree celsius.

-   Leaf area per leaflet : The total leaf area of all the leaves used
    to measured the LMA, divided by the number of leaflet to get the
    leaf area per leaflet.

-   Leaf length per leaflet : For most of the samples, we have used five
    leaves to measure the leaf length of each leaflet (including the
    petiole). We used the meter scale to measure the length of the
    leaflet and averaged the total length of all the leaflet to get the
    leaf length per leaflet.

-   Leaf moisture content : Few leaves were separated from the burning
    samples right before burning. Those leaves were went through 48
    hours of drying inside oven at 65 degree celsius. The moisture
    content was calculated as percentage in dry basis.

Apart from all the canopy traits and leaf traits, we also measured the
field moisture content. We separated some twig with leaves from the
sub-sample and took their fresh weight. After 48 hours of drying inside
oven, we took the dry weight and calculated the field moisture content
as percentage in dry basis.

## Flammability traits and their descriptions

After 36 hours of drying period, the burning samples put on grill for
two minutes for pre-heating. Right before the pre-heating period, the
weather data (Temperature, humidity and wind speed) were recorded with a
Kestrel 3000 pocket weather meter. After two minutes of pre-heating ,an
ignition blow torch turned on until a sample got ignited.

-   Heat release : Calculated by the temperature difference of the
    aluminium disc between before ignition and after flame stopped. The
    discs temperature recorded by 572-2 Fluke infrared thermometer.

-   Flame duration : The duration of the flame sustained. The duration
    between the time when the ignition started and when the flame
    stopped.

-   Flame height : Measured by a meter scale attached with the barbecue
    apparatus. An assistance continuously kept eye on the flame and
    estimated the maximum flame height of each burning sample.

-   Mass consumed : Calculated by the difference of the mass of burning
    samples before and after burning.

-   Volume burned : The percentage of volume of the burning samples
    estimated visually. After each trial, at least two person together
    estimated the percentage of the voulme of the burning samples to
    reduce the error.

-   Ignition delay : The time taken by each samples after two minutes
    pre-heating to get ignited.

-   Self ignition : If a sample get ignited during pre-heating, the
    sample scored 1 for self ignition, else 0. If a sample had self
    ignition and the flame sustained after two minutes pre-heating , the
    sample got 0 as ignition delay. Some of the samples had self
    ignition during pre-heating and the flame ceased after few seconds,
    they ignited by the blow torch. Therefore they scored 1 as self
    ignition and had their ignition delay period as well since they are
    ignited by the blow torch.

-   Maximum temperature : When a sample get ignited, the maximum
    temperature of the disc near the flame recorded by the temperature
    gun. Most of the sample doesn't have their maximum temperature.
    However, we have also three thermo-couples data loggers at three
    position (both sides and at the middle) which were recording the
    temperature of the entire trial at one second interval. We
    calculated the peak temperature from the data loggers.

We have also calculated the total duration of the trial where the
temperature were greater than 100 degree celsius. The sum of the total
temperature where the trial temperature were greater than 100 degree
celsius from the thermo-couples data loggers.

## Data

Each data file in data in shrubflam repo has as associated machine
readable metadata file. If a data file named
canopy_measurements_2022.csv, then it has an associated metadata file as
canopy_measurements_metadata.csv. The metadata file describes each
variables information: name of the variables, the data type, the unit
and a description how the variables measured.

## Data analysis and scripts

All the data analyses were performed in R with all scripts in
scripts/. To reproduce the results, please read run-all.R script. The task need to perform before
running each script is documented at the beginning of each script.

## Hobo data loggers, aluminum discs and gas flow

The gas flow from the Blue Rhino gas cylinder was 20.35 gram per minute.
The position and distance of the data loggers:

-   Height : The height of the data loggers from the grill was 20 cm for
    each data loggers. The height of the aluminium discs was also 20 cm
    from the grill to the middle of the disks.

-   Position : Both the left and right hobo data loggers is 18.5 cm from
    the both sides and the mid hobo data loggers approximately 44 cm
    away from both sides. The distance of the disk from both sides is
    approximately 30 cm from both sides.

Both the position and height of the data loggers and discs displaced
time to time during some trials due to the massiveness of some samples.

## List of missing data

-   Bench drying hobo data : We have bench drying hobo data for 5 trials
    date. The 05_19_2022.csv and 05_20_2022.csv is the weather data of
    the lab from the day after the first trial.

-   Wind speed data : We have three missing wind speed data of 129
    trials which is the number of trials after removing the species
    which has less than three samples and two samples, one of them has
    missing flammability data and another one is biased.

-   Air temperature : We have 37 missing data for the air temperature of
    the trials from Kestrel 3000 pocket weather meter. The air
    temperature of the first trial date is from the hourly average
    temperature from
    https://weatherspark.com/h/d/4735/2022/5/20/Historical-Weather-on-Friday-May-20-2022-in-Lubbock-Texas-United-States\#Figures-Temperature.

-   Humidity : We have only few humidity data for few trials from
    Kestrel 3000 pocket weather meter. Almost entirely missing for all
    the trials.

However, we have temperature and humidity for 89 trials from hobo data
loggers.
